Logbooks/LOGBOOK4.md, before:

# Environment Variable and Set-UID Program Lab

## Tasks

### Task 1
We can use 'printenv' or 'env' to print all system variables, or if we want a specific environment, we can identify that environment:<br>
 ```bash
 $ printenv
 ```
We get this output:


```
SHELL=/bin/bash
SESSION_MANAGER=local/VM:@/tmp/.ICE-unix/7983,unix/VM:/tmp/.ICE-unix/7983
QT_ACCESSIBILITY=1
COLORTERM=truecolor
XDG_CONFIG_DIRS=/etc/xdg/xdg-ubuntu:/etc/xdg
XDG_MENU_PREFIX=gnome-
GNOME_DESKTOP_SESSION_ID=this-is-deprecated
GNOME_SHELL_SESSION_MODE=ubuntu
SSH_AUTH_SOCK=/run/user/1000/keyring/ssh
XMODIFIERS=@im=ibus
DESKTOP_SESSION=ubuntu
SSH_AGENT_PID=2005
GTK_MODULES=gail:atk-bridge
PWD=/home/seed/Desktop/Labsetup
LOGNAME=seed
XDG_SESSION_DESKTOP=ubuntu
XDG_SESSION_TYPE=x11
GPG_AGENT_INFO=/run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent:0:1
XAUTHORITY=/run/user/1000/gdm/Xauthority
IM_CONFIG_CHECK_ENV=1
GJS_DEBUG_TOPICS=JS ERROR;JS LOG
WINDOWPATH=3
HOME=/home/seed
USERNAME=seed
IM_CONFIG_PHASE=1
LANG=en_US.UTF-8
LS_COLORS=rs=0:di=01;34:ln=01;36:mh=00:pi=40;33:so=01;35:do=01;35:bd=40;33;01:cd=40;33;01:or=40;31;01:mi=00:su=37;41:sg=30;43:ca=30;41:tw=30;42:ow=34;42:st=37;44:ex=01;32:*.tar=01;31:*.tgz=01;31:*.arc=01;31:*.arj=01;31:*.taz=01;31:*.lha=01;31:*.lz4=01;31:*.lzh=01;31:*.lzma=01;31:*.tlz=01;31:*.txz=01;31:*.tzo=01;31:*.t7z=01;31:*.zip=01;31:*.z=01;31:*.dz=01;31:*.gz=01;31:*.lrz=01;31:*.lz=01;31:*.lzo=01;31:*.xz=01;31:*.zst=01;31:*.tzst=01;31:*.bz2=01;31:*.bz=01;31:*.tbz=01;31:*.tbz2=01;31:*.tz=01;31:*.deb=01;31:*.rpm=01;31:*.jar=01;31:*.war=01;31:*.ear=01;31:*.sar=01;31:*.rar=01;31:*.alz=01;31:*.ace=01;31:*.zoo=01;31:*.cpio=01;31:*.7z=01;31:*.rz=01;31:*.cab=01;31:*.wim=01;31:*.swm=01;31:*.dwm=01;31:*.esd=01;31:*.jpg=01;35:*.jpeg=01;35:*.mjpg=01;35:*.mjpeg=01;35:*.gif=01;35:*.bmp=01;35:*.pbm=01;35:*.pgm=01;35:*.ppm=01;35:*.tga=01;35:*.xbm=01;35:*.xpm=01;35:*.tif=01;35:*.tiff=01;35:*.png=01;35:*.svg=01;35:*.svgz=01;35:*.mng=01;35:*.pcx=01;35:*.mov=01;35:*.mpg=01;35:*.mpeg=01;35:*.m2v=01;35:*.mkv=01;35:*.webm=01;35:*.ogm=01;35:*.mp4=01;35:*.m4v=01;35:*.mp4v=01;35:*.vob=01;35:*.qt=01;35:*.nuv=01;35:*.wmv=01;35:*.asf=01;35:*.rm=01;35:*.rmvb=01;35:*.flc=01;35:*.avi=01;35:*.fli=01;35:*.flv=01;35:*.gl=01;35:*.dl=01;35:*.xcf=01;35:*.xwd=01;35:*.yuv=01;35:*.cgm=01;35:*.emf=01;35:*.ogv=01;35:*.ogx=01;35:*.aac=00;36:*.au=00;36:*.flac=00;36:*.m4a=00;36:*.mid=00;36:*.midi=00;36:*.mka=00;36:*.mp3=00;36:*.mpc=00;36:*.ogg=00;36:*.ra=00;36:*.wav=00;36:*.oga=00;36:*.opus=00;36:*.spx=00;36:*.xspf=00;36:
XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP=ubuntu:GNOME
VTE_VERSION=6003
GNOME_TERMINAL_SCREEN=/org/gnome/Terminal/screen/e494dcbf_b65d_4ea7_9713_3704ed94ecdd
INVOCATION_ID=dace9bf0ad34464e9cdc916213de7b1c
MANAGERPID=1793
GJS_DEBUG_OUTPUT=stderr
LESSCLOSE=/usr/bin/lesspipe %s %s
XDG_SESSION_CLASS=user
TERM=xterm-256color
LESSOPEN=| /usr/bin/lesspipe %s
USER=seed
GNOME_TERMINAL_SERVICE=:1.109
DISPLAY=:1
SHLVL=1
QT_IM_MODULE=ibus
XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/run/user/1000
JOURNAL_STREAM=9:191409
XDG_DATA_DIRS=/usr/share/ubuntu:/usr/local/share/:/usr/share/:/var/lib/snapd/desktop
PATH=/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin:.
GDMSESSION=ubuntu
DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS=unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus
_=/usr/bin/printenv
OLDPWD=/home/seed/Desktop

```

After, we tried to use 'export' or 'unset' to set or unset environment variables.

```bash
$ export
 ```

We get this output:

```
declare -x COLORTERM="truecolor"
declare -x DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS="unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus"
declare -x DESKTOP_SESSION="ubuntu"
...
declare -x XDG_SESSION_DESKTOP="ubuntu"
declare -x XDG_SESSION_TYPE="x11"
declare -x XMODIFIERS="@im=ibus"
```

```bash
$ export test
 ```

We get this output:

```
declare -x COLORTERM="truecolor"
declare -x DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS="unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus"
declare -x DESKTOP_SESSION="ubuntu"
...
declare -x XDG_SESSION_DESKTOP="ubuntu"
declare -x XDG_SESSION_TYPE="x11"
declare -x XMODIFIERS="@im=ibus"
declare -x test
```

```bash
$ unset test
$ export
 ```

 We get this output:

 ```
declare -x COLORTERM="truecolor"
declare -x DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS="unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus"
declare -x DESKTOP_SESSION="ubuntu"
...
declare -x XDG_SESSION_DESKTOP="ubuntu"
declare -x XDG_SESSION_TYPE="x11"
declare -x XMODIFIERS="@im=ibus"
```


### Task 2 
We saved the environment variables of a parent process in one file and the environment variables of the child process in another file.

By using 'diff,' we can see that the environment variables of the parent process are all inherited by the child process after the fork(). This means there is no difference in the execution environment.

![ForkDifference](/docs/week4/task2.png)

### Task 3
- Nesta tarefa, vimos de que maneira as variáveis de ambiente são afetadas quando um novo programa é executado, usando 'execve()', que chama uma system call para um novo commando e executa-o.
- Ao executar o ficheiro 'myenv.c' inicialmente 'execve()'  tem o terceiro argumento em NULL, logo dá um resultado vazio.
- Ao mudarmos o terceiro argumento para 'environ' temos como resultado as variáveis de ambiente.

### Task 4
- Nesta tarefa, vimos de que maneira as variáveis de ambiente são afetadas quando um novo programa é executado, usando 'system()', que em vez de executar o comando diretamente como no caso do 'execve()', executa 'bin(sh -c command', ou seja, executa '/bin/sh' e pede à shell para executar o comando.
 Usando 'system()' estamos a passar as variáveis de ambiente para o novo programa '/bin/sh'.
- A diferença entre 'execve()' e 'system()' é que a primeira executa o comando mantendo o processo e as variáveis de ambiente e a segunda cria um novo processo e passa todas as variáveis de ambiente para o novo processo.

 ### Task 5
- Set-UID é um mecanismo de segurança do Unix. Quando um programa com Set-UID corre, assume todos as previlégios do dono(ex: se root é o dono, o programa tem previlégios de root).
- Criamos um programa que mostra as variáveis de ambiente do processo atual e depois definimos root como o dono do programa e tornamos o programa num programa Set-UID: <br>
 ````bash
 $ sudo chown root setUID 
 $ sudo chmod 4755 setUID 
 ````
- Depois podemos mudar algumas variáveis de ambiente para testarmos:
````bash
$ export PATH=$PATH:/home/seed/Desktop
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/home/seed/myScripts/
$ export COURSE_NAME=FSI
````
Ao corrermos o programa novamente e conseguimos ver as variáveis de ambiente mudadas por nós estão lá, menos LD_LIBRARY_PATH. Isto acontece porque LD_LIBRARY_PATH define onde se vai buscar as bibliotecas dinâmicas e isso poderia ser uma maneira de inserir código malicioso no programa substituindo as bibliotecas.<br>


### Task 6
- Nesta task criamos um programa Set-UID que usa o commando 'ls' do Linux:
``` c
system("ls");
```
- Depois criamos um programa que para simular um   programa malicioso que chamamos de 'ls' no diretório '/home/seed/Desktop/lsMalicioso' .
Mudamos a variável de ambiente PATH para o diretório do programa que criamos:<br>
``` bash
$ export PATH='/home/seed/Desktop/lsMalicioso'
```
- Ao correr ls vemos que corre o ls malicioso e não o definido inicialmente pelo SO.

Commit message:

added demonstrations for task 3 and 4 - LOGBOOK4

Logbooks/LOGBOOK4.md, after:

# Environment Variable and Set-UID Program Lab

## Tasks

### Task 1
We can use 'printenv' or 'env' to print all system variables, or if we want a specific environment, we can identify that environment:<br>
 ```bash
 $ printenv
 ```
We get this output:


```
SHELL=/bin/bash
SESSION_MANAGER=local/VM:@/tmp/.ICE-unix/7983,unix/VM:/tmp/.ICE-unix/7983
QT_ACCESSIBILITY=1
COLORTERM=truecolor
XDG_CONFIG_DIRS=/etc/xdg/xdg-ubuntu:/etc/xdg
XDG_MENU_PREFIX=gnome-
GNOME_DESKTOP_SESSION_ID=this-is-deprecated
GNOME_SHELL_SESSION_MODE=ubuntu
SSH_AUTH_SOCK=/run/user/1000/keyring/ssh
XMODIFIERS=@im=ibus
DESKTOP_SESSION=ubuntu
SSH_AGENT_PID=2005
GTK_MODULES=gail:atk-bridge
PWD=/home/seed/Desktop/Labsetup
LOGNAME=seed
XDG_SESSION_DESKTOP=ubuntu
XDG_SESSION_TYPE=x11
GPG_AGENT_INFO=/run/user/1000/gnupg/S.gpg-agent:0:1
XAUTHORITY=/run/user/1000/gdm/Xauthority
IM_CONFIG_CHECK_ENV=1
GJS_DEBUG_TOPICS=JS ERROR;JS LOG
WINDOWPATH=3
HOME=/home/seed
USERNAME=seed
IM_CONFIG_PHASE=1
LANG=en_US.UTF-8
LS_COLORS=rs=0:di=01;34:ln=01;36:mh=00:pi=40;33:so=01;35:do=01;35:bd=40;33;01:cd=40;33;01:or=40;31;01:mi=00:su=37;41:sg=30;43:ca=30;41:tw=30;42:ow=34;42:st=37;44:ex=01;32:*.tar=01;31:*.tgz=01;31:*.arc=01;31:*.arj=01;31:*.taz=01;31:*.lha=01;31:*.lz4=01;31:*.lzh=01;31:*.lzma=01;31:*.tlz=01;31:*.txz=01;31:*.tzo=01;31:*.t7z=01;31:*.zip=01;31:*.z=01;31:*.dz=01;31:*.gz=01;31:*.lrz=01;31:*.lz=01;31:*.lzo=01;31:*.xz=01;31:*.zst=01;31:*.tzst=01;31:*.bz2=01;31:*.bz=01;31:*.tbz=01;31:*.tbz2=01;31:*.tz=01;31:*.deb=01;31:*.rpm=01;31:*.jar=01;31:*.war=01;31:*.ear=01;31:*.sar=01;31:*.rar=01;31:*.alz=01;31:*.ace=01;31:*.zoo=01;31:*.cpio=01;31:*.7z=01;31:*.rz=01;31:*.cab=01;31:*.wim=01;31:*.swm=01;31:*.dwm=01;31:*.esd=01;31:*.jpg=01;35:*.jpeg=01;35:*.mjpg=01;35:*.mjpeg=01;35:*.gif=01;35:*.bmp=01;35:*.pbm=01;35:*.pgm=01;35:*.ppm=01;35:*.tga=01;35:*.xbm=01;35:*.xpm=01;35:*.tif=01;35:*.tiff=01;35:*.png=01;35:*.svg=01;35:*.svgz=01;35:*.mng=01;35:*.pcx=01;35:*.mov=01;35:*.mpg=01;35:*.mpeg=01;35:*.m2v=01;35:*.mkv=01;35:*.webm=01;35:*.ogm=01;35:*.mp4=01;35:*.m4v=01;35:*.mp4v=01;35:*.vob=01;35:*.qt=01;35:*.nuv=01;35:*.wmv=01;35:*.asf=01;35:*.rm=01;35:*.rmvb=01;35:*.flc=01;35:*.avi=01;35:*.fli=01;35:*.flv=01;35:*.gl=01;35:*.dl=01;35:*.xcf=01;35:*.xwd=01;35:*.yuv=01;35:*.cgm=01;35:*.emf=01;35:*.ogv=01;35:*.ogx=01;35:*.aac=00;36:*.au=00;36:*.flac=00;36:*.m4a=00;36:*.mid=00;36:*.midi=00;36:*.mka=00;36:*.mp3=00;36:*.mpc=00;36:*.ogg=00;36:*.ra=00;36:*.wav=00;36:*.oga=00;36:*.opus=00;36:*.spx=00;36:*.xspf=00;36:
XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP=ubuntu:GNOME
VTE_VERSION=6003
GNOME_TERMINAL_SCREEN=/org/gnome/Terminal/screen/e494dcbf_b65d_4ea7_9713_3704ed94ecdd
INVOCATION_ID=dace9bf0ad34464e9cdc916213de7b1c
MANAGERPID=1793
GJS_DEBUG_OUTPUT=stderr
LESSCLOSE=/usr/bin/lesspipe %s %s
XDG_SESSION_CLASS=user
TERM=xterm-256color
LESSOPEN=| /usr/bin/lesspipe %s
USER=seed
GNOME_TERMINAL_SERVICE=:1.109
DISPLAY=:1
SHLVL=1
QT_IM_MODULE=ibus
XDG_RUNTIME_DIR=/run/user/1000
JOURNAL_STREAM=9:191409
XDG_DATA_DIRS=/usr/share/ubuntu:/usr/local/share/:/usr/share/:/var/lib/snapd/desktop
PATH=/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin:.
GDMSESSION=ubuntu
DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS=unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus
_=/usr/bin/printenv
OLDPWD=/home/seed/Desktop

```

After, we tried to use 'export' or 'unset' to set or unset environment variables.

```bash
$ export
 ```

We get this output:

```
declare -x COLORTERM="truecolor"
declare -x DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS="unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus"
declare -x DESKTOP_SESSION="ubuntu"
...
declare -x XDG_SESSION_DESKTOP="ubuntu"
declare -x XDG_SESSION_TYPE="x11"
declare -x XMODIFIERS="@im=ibus"
```

```bash
$ export test
 ```

We get this output:

```
declare -x COLORTERM="truecolor"
declare -x DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS="unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus"
declare -x DESKTOP_SESSION="ubuntu"
...
declare -x XDG_SESSION_DESKTOP="ubuntu"
declare -x XDG_SESSION_TYPE="x11"
declare -x XMODIFIERS="@im=ibus"
declare -x test
```

```bash
$ unset test
$ export
 ```

 We get this output:

 ```
declare -x COLORTERM="truecolor"
declare -x DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS="unix:path=/run/user/1000/bus"
declare -x DESKTOP_SESSION="ubuntu"
...
declare -x XDG_SESSION_DESKTOP="ubuntu"
declare -x XDG_SESSION_TYPE="x11"
declare -x XMODIFIERS="@im=ibus"
```


### Task 2 
We saved the environment variables of a parent process in one file and the environment variables of the child process in another file.

By using 'diff,' we can see that the environment variables of the parent process are all inherited by the child process after the fork(). This means there is no difference in the execution environment.

![ForkDifference](/docs/week4/task2.png)

### Task 3
In this task, we observed how environment variables are affected when a new program is executed using 'execve()', which invokes a system call for a new command and executes it.

When running the 'myenv.c' file initially with 'execve()', the third argument is NULL, resulting in an empty outcome.

When we change the third argument to 'environ,' we obtain the environment variables as a result.

![EmptyFile](/docs/week4/task3(1).png)

![VariablesFile](/docs/week4/task3(2).png)

### Task 4
In this task, we observed how environment variables are affected when a new program is executed using 'system()', which, instead of executing the command directly as in the case of 'execve()', runs '/bin/sh -c command', in other words, it executes '/bin/sh' and requests the shell to run the command.

When using 'system()', we are passing the environment variables to the new program '/bin/sh'.

![SystemCommand](/docs/week4/task4(2).png)

The output confirms that the system call passes the environment variables array to the execve call.

![VariablesFile](/docs/week4/task4.png)

 ### Task 5
- Set-UID é um mecanismo de segurança do Unix. Quando um programa com Set-UID corre, assume todos as previlégios do dono(ex: se root é o dono, o programa tem previlégios de root).
- Criamos um programa que mostra as variáveis de ambiente do processo atual e depois definimos root como o dono do programa e tornamos o programa num programa Set-UID: <br>
 ````bash
 $ sudo chown root setUID 
 $ sudo chmod 4755 setUID 
 ````
- Depois podemos mudar algumas variáveis de ambiente para testarmos:
````bash
$ export PATH=$PATH:/home/seed/Desktop
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/home/seed/myScripts/
$ export COURSE_NAME=FSI
````
Ao corrermos o programa novamente e conseguimos ver as variáveis de ambiente mudadas por nós estão lá, menos LD_LIBRARY_PATH. Isto acontece porque LD_LIBRARY_PATH define onde se vai buscar as bibliotecas dinâmicas e isso poderia ser uma maneira de inserir código malicioso no programa substituindo as bibliotecas.<br>


### Task 6
- Nesta task criamos um programa Set-UID que usa o commando 'ls' do Linux:
``` c
system("ls");
```
- Depois criamos um programa que para simular um   programa malicioso que chamamos de 'ls' no diretório '/home/seed/Desktop/lsMalicioso' .
Mudamos a variável de ambiente PATH para o diretório do programa que criamos:<br>
``` bash
$ export PATH='/home/seed/Desktop/lsMalicioso'
```
- Ao correr ls vemos que corre o ls malicioso e não o definido inicialmente pelo SO.
